All right.
So now we're going to start taking a look at collections now most of the time Katlin uses Jabez collection
classes but you'll see that there sometimes it uses its own.
But even when it's using Javaris collection classes you can do more with collections in Katlin.
Now all of the Katlin collections classes can be found in the Cartland collections package.
And since Katlin uses Java's collections under the covers most of the time the code you write will be
completely interoperable with Java.
Now as you've seen cotland has the notion of mutable and immutable collections you can operate on an
immutable collection.
You can add and remove items when you call some functions but the result will be a brand new instance.
So when you're working with an immutable instance the instance itself is never changed.
If you call a function it's going to change the collection in some way that function will return a new
instance.
Now all collections take a generic type and all the read only interfaces are covariant.
This isn't going to mean anything to you right now but we're going to go over covariance when we cover
generics.
For now all you have to understand that because all the read only interfaces are covariant that means
you can do something like assign a list of big decimal to a list of any.
Because when something is covariant you can treat a class like one of its parent classes.
So because big decimal is a subclass of any you can assign a list of big decimal to a list of any and
as I said we're going to go over this in more detail when we cover generics.
So now let's go to intelligence and we'll take a look at the collection interface and the collection
interface is implemented by the list and the set collections.
So I've already created the usual project etc..
So what I'm going to do here is just type in collection and then I'll ask him to take me over to the
declaration.
So here is the declaration for collection will see that it implements iterable and it's using out.
That's because it's covariant.
And as I said we'll cover that when we cover generics and we'll see that in this collection.
There's not much in here you can't actually change the collection.
You can check if it's empty.
You can see if it contains something you can iterate over it and that's about it.
Now if you look at mutable collection will see that it extends collection and implements the mutable
iterable interface.
And you'll notice that it is not covariant meaning it doesn't have the.
Out here and we'll cover this in more detail later on.
But that means if you have a mutable collection of big decimal You can't assign that to a mutable collection
of any.
And also when we cover covariance you'll learn that when something is covariant you can't modify it
you can't add anything to it.
And of course two immutable collection you can add things to it.
Covariant collections are read only so that's why list or collection rather can be covariant.
But if you're going to want a collection you can change then it can't be covariant and will cover this
later.
Now I mention that the array class is considered to be a collection and caught Lenon that's true but
it's in the Cartland package not in the Cartland collections package.
And also it doesn't implement any of the collections interfaces so it is considered a collection but
it kind of stands on its own.
Now we already covered arrays so we're going to start our tour of collections with lists.
We've already been using lists and you know what a list is from Java.
So let's jump right in.
We're not going to spend much time on lists but we will take a look at them.
I'm going to close this file down now so as you know there are two types of list list and mutable lists
so let's start by creating an immutable list of strings.
So say vals strings equals list of spring summer fall and winter.
I think I did winter fall at one point but that's OK.
So you've seen this before and the compiler can infer the type but what is the type.
I mean we know we're getting a list but what is the concrete class list as an interface.
So let's print the class that we're getting.
So we'll say print line.
String the Java class.
So let's go ahead and run
and will see that we have an array list.
But look at the name very carefully.
We don't have a Javid.
You tail broad array list.
We have a Javid you till dawn.
Arrays array list.
Now if you know anything about this class from Java you can't add or remove anything from this type
of list but you can change one of the elements.
You can call the set method and say something like array list Daut set index one comma and a new instance.
So while you can't add or remove anything you can actually change the list.
So this is actually a mutable list.
Katlin makes it immutable by not having any functions in the calling list interface that can change
the array list.
But as I said in Java This is mutable so there are ways around the immutability when you're using this
from Java.
So you have to be aware of this if you're going to be using this from Java when you pass this list to
let's say a method that accepts one of these array list you could potentially change the list so you'd
have to be aware of that in your CANTLIN code.
And of course you wouldn't want to do that in your Java code.
If you're calling it from Katlin But of course if you want to mutable list then just use a mutable list
type.
I mean there's no need to then use an immutable list type.
But as I said it's important to note that since cotland is enforcing immutability using interface definitions
if you pass an instance of an immutable collection to Java code the immutable characteristic is off
the table nothing will stop the Java code from modifying the collection.
So when we say that a collection is immutable we mean that it's guaranteed to be immutable from Katlin.
When you're using it in a caught Lynn file in a Cartland application the moment you give the collection
to Java all bets are off.
All right.
So how can we create an empty list.
Well we've seen this before we can save now.
Empty list equals empty list.
Now of course we get an error because the compiler says I have no clue what type of list this is Solar's
two ways we can fix it.
We can go like this or if we wanted to we could explicitly declare here we can say list string.
So right now we're being redundant.
We don't need both.
And this gives us an empty list.
But what class are we getting or are we still getting age Avodart still that array list.
Well let's print out the to the class
let's run now
and this time we're getting one of the collections classes called empty list.
So this is one case where you won't get a job for instance and that kind of makes sense because as we
said before you can't really do anything with this list.
So there's no need to really have a full fledged Java class backing it.
Now you can also do something like this.
You can go var let's call it strings one and this time we'll have to actually we can do it.
People's list of them will say string.
We can do that.
The thing is we've just created an immutable list here so if you want to add to it like no strings one
Daut you can't because it's an immutable list.
So most of the time if you're dealing with immutable Lisieux one an empty list.
Let's say your function can return a list and you want to be able to return an empty list at times and
that's one case where you might just use empty list just so the caller can check to see if anything
came back.
But what happened what would happen if we tried to get something from here from this empty list.
Because we can.
We just saw that we can actually get something.
So let us be stupid and let's print line.
Empty list.
0.
Now I'm sure you can guess what's going to happen here.
But let's demonstrate it and sure enough we get an index out of bounds exception so we can still shoot
ourselves in the foot.
We can check to see if the list is empty before we use it.
So we could say if not empty list is empty and then we can go ahead and do that and that will prevent
the index out of bounds exception.
And again you might want to do something like this.
If you're getting a list back from a function that could potentially be an empty list there's nothing
new here.
All right so now let's create a list that doesn't contain nulls.
So we want a list that we know for sure does not contain nulls so we can say fülle not.
No list equals and we can say a list of not no.
And then give it the initial values so I'm going to say hello no.
Good bye and I know what you're probably thinking here but bear with me.
Let's print the last print line.
Now listen let's run.
And now you can see why I did that.
The null value was never added to the list.
So if you want to create Let say a list out of values that you've been given and you don't know what
those values are and you want to guarantee that there are not going to be any nulls in the last few
can use this list of not all function.
OK so we've seen that when we use a list we get a Java utility arrays array lists class.
Is there a way we can just get a plain old Java dot utility array list and there is we just have to
specifically ask for it so we can save Val array lists equals array a list of.
And we'll just make this one an array list of ints.
And now if we print out the class realist taught Java CLOS
will see that we now have a Java.
You still don't array list.
However we now have a mutable list.
So if you want an immutable list you're going to have to have one of these Javid utility arrays array
list which doesn't matter because you can't add anything to the list and you can't remove anything from
the list so that's fine.
You say you want an immutable list meaning you're never going to change it.
But if you want an array list you're going to end up with amiable list.
So let's try creating a mutable list.
So will say Val mutable list equals mutable list of and we'll make this list of ints again one two three
and now we'll print it
and see what we get for that I actually went to the Java class so let me change that.
And you'll see that we get an array list.
So when you ask for a immutable list you're going to get a Java utility arrays array list when you ask
for an array list explicitly or you just ask for immutable list you're going to get our good friend
Javid dot dot array list.
OK so let's say we have an array.
Can we convert that to a list in cotland.
Well yeah we can very easily so we'll say Val array equals array.
And we'll give it black white and green and then if we want that to become a list we can just say vowel
color list equals list of array.
And now we'll print line color list.
Let's run and OK I'll admit that I like to a little bit because this doesn't give us a list of black
white and green so it doesn't give us a list of the individual elements.
What this does and you probably would have guessed this if you had time to look at the code before I
just went ahead and ran it.
You're passing the array as an initial value.
So what this is going to do is create a list with one element.
The array this in here is the array reference.
When you see something that begins with a square brace in an L that means that it's an array of whatever
comes after.
So we have an array of string here a list with one element and that's not what we wanted.
Probably we probably wanted to convert this to a list of three elements.
So let's try another method we could use the spread operator remember the spread operator it unpacks
and array.
So let's give that a shot so we'll just add the spread operator here and now that should impact the
array into its three elements and then pass those three values to Liskov.
So we'll probably get what we want here.
But let's run and we do.
This time we get a list of black white and green but there's an easier way to do it.
You can just say array dot to list.
And now if we run we'll get the same thing and you can do the same thing if you if you have an array
that's one of those special primitive type arrays remember if we were saying that if you have Java code
that you want to call and the java method once a primitive array that you can't pass it a Katlin array
with a big day.
You have to create one of those special primitive array type.
So let's do that quickly we'll save out ints equals Kint array of 1 to three and then if we want to
convert this to a list we just do the same thing.
Print line and start to list.
And if we run
we'll see that we have a list of 1 to 3.
Ok so we know how to create mutable and immutable lists.
Of course since there are Java classes under the covers most of them we know that the empty list is
not.
But most of the ones that you can actually do something with there are Java classes under the covers
so you can do everything with them that you can do a job.
I mean you can get items you can set items if you have a mutable list etc. but as you've seen you can
use the square bracket notation in cotland.
So here we could say let me go to our immutable list so we can say print lying mutable list and we can
say two but we can also set things that way we can say mutable list one equals 20.
And then we'll print lying our immutable list.
Let's do that
and we'll see that mutable list 2 is equal to 3.
And here we've replaced the second element in that list which is at index 1 with 20.
So in addition to using set and get cars we can do that too.
We could have said mutable lists of dot set the usual saying and then provide at the index or we can
go mutable Lescaut get just as you can in Java.
You can also use the square bracket notation almost as if this was an array.
So you can do everything you can to do in Java.
And Courtland has added more functions to the collections classes and we'll take a look at some of those
in the next video.